---
title: Mexican Mission
weight: 100
type: essay
---
## Mexican Austin, 1900-1939 and the Origins of San José Catholic Church, Austin

### Colonia of West Austin

In 1872, the Bishop of Galveston offered a parish in Austin to the Congregation of the Holy Cross (C.S.C.). That same year, the Holy Cross Fathers purchased a farm that later became St. Edward’s University. Before 1907, Rev. Patrick O'Reilly, C.S.C., established a mission for Spanish-speaking Catholics living in a neighborhood called West Austin in what is now downtown Austin. The neighborhood was located west of Congress Avenue and near the outlet of Shoal Creek. The people were Mexican or Italian immigrants. In 1907, O’Reilly was pastor of Our Lady of Guadalupe Church on the northwest corner of W. 5th and Guadalupe Streets. The parishioners of Guadalupe Church lived in the Mexican colonia called West Austin or Little Mexico.

### Mexican immigration increased after 1910

Between 1910 and 1924, many Catholics emigrated from northern Mexico to Texas to escape the violence of the Mexican Revolution. Exiled priests and bishops and those with urban skills settled in San Antonio. Those who arrived in rural Travis and Caldwell Counties were farm workers. They found employment on ranches in south and central Texas. Those who came to Austin settled near African-American neighborhoods such as Clarksville, Masonville, Montopolis and Bouldin Creek or in the area around Guadalupe Church where rent was cheap and where they were welcomed. By the 1920s, there were five Mexican neighborhoods located in West Side Austin. The neighborhoods were between Congress and West Avenues and W. 1st and W. 7th Streets in downtown Austin.

In response to rising real estate prices and restrictive Jim Crow practices of the time, Mexicans began moving to east of East Avenue (now I-35 Highway). A census taken in 1923 found 595 Mexicans living on the West Side (87 families) and 1,442 in the East Side (316 families). In 1925, the parish of Our Lady of Guadalupe moved to Lydia and E. 9th Streets in East Austin and the Oblates of Mary Immaculate (OMI) took over its administration. In 1928, the African-American residents of Austin, who previously lived throughout the city in small enclaves, were encouraged by the City Government to resettle in East Austin (an area called Masonville) and by 1930, 80% of the African-American residents of Austin lived in Masonville. Newly arrived Mexicans were concentrated in neighborhoods east and south of the so-called Negro district.

### The Bouldin Addition

In 1910, a concrete bridge replaced an old iron bridge where Congress Avenue crossed the Colorado River. Farmers who owned land south of the Colorado River began subdividing their farms and selling the land as residential lots. In 1894, David W. Bouldin, who owned a farm that extended from the Colorado River south to what is now William Cannon Drive, began to subdivide his farm and sell lots for residential use. The first section to be subdivided was the Bouldin Addition. Most homes in the Bouldin Addition were built between 1910 and 1930. An African-American neighborhood called Brackenridge was already located east of East Bouldin Creek and west of Congress Avenue. During the 1920s, Mexicans began moving to the Bouldin Addition west of the Brackenridge neighborhood.

In 1939, four priests of the Congregation of the Holy Cross (C.S.C.), who lived at St. Edward’s University, began working with Mexicans who lived in the eastern and southern parts of Travis County. Rev. Mendez, C.S.C., began celebrating Mass for Mexicans who otherwise attended Guadalupe Church in Austin. The Masses were said in a chapel on the property of Saint Ignatius Martyr Church at 211 West Johanna Street or outdoors on a ranch in South Austin near what is now the intersection of the Missouri-Pacific railroad tracks and Stassney Lane.

In early 1940, two Sisters of the Missionary Catechists (Missionary Sisters of Our Lady of Victory) were engaged to search out and register Mexican farm workers living in the counties of Bastrop and Travis in what was then the Diocese of San Antonio. Rev. James Donahue, C.S.C., a retired priest, visited the families and attended to those who needed baptism, confirmation or marriage. The marriages he performed appear in the records of San José Church.

### Building San José Church, 1940

In 1940, a group of Mexicans who lived in or near the Bouldin Addition neighborhood began construction of a church for the San José Mission at the corner of S. 3rd and West Mary Streets. They worked under the direction of Rev. Mendez. The construction of the church of San José began a long association between these men and the Holy Cross Fathers. After finishing the San José Church building in June 1940, they built a second building in Creedmoor and later a chapel on the San Antonio Highway at Buda. Somewhat later, the men built a fourth chapel in Montopolis near the Colorado River.

The stones used to build the churches were taken from a farm near Zilker Park. They were carried to the building site in a truck belonging to Eliseo and Gabriel Gutiérrez. Mexican volunteers and missionary priests worked together to construct the buildings. The ceiling beams were cedar logs hewn by hand. The trusses were old power poles from the Congress Avenue trolley line. The floors were flagstone. Volunteers built the three churches using blueprints prepared by the architect who built the structures at Bastrop State Park. The supply of donated stone ran out prior to the construction of the church at Montopolis and it was built of cut stone.

After 1945, San José Parish purchased a one-story house next to the church and converted it into the parish hall. In 1948, the building was demolished and a two-story rectory built as a residence for the missionary priests. At least seven Holy Cross priests lived in the building at one time. They had charge of the five Mexican missions that were active during this period. This building was later moved to its current location next to the second San José Church south of Oltorf Street.

### Spanish Diocesan Convention, 1940

In April 1940, Holy Cross priests and the pastor of Guadalupe Church in Austin organized a retreat for Spanish-speaking Catholic religious societies and individuals living around Austin. The first of sixty annual retreats (called Diocesan Spanish Conventions) was held in Taylor in the Galveston Diocese (north of the Colorado River). The convention was scheduled to meet during Lent before migrant farm workers began their northern journey at the end of April. Individuals from various churches and delegates from fraternal organizations such as the Sociedad del Sagrado Corazón, Sociedad de Nuestra Señora de Guadalupe and the Hijas de María (a young women’s group) attended the retreat. The annual conventions of Spanish-speak Catholic organizations continued until 2000.

In 1940, before construction of San José Church began, men who belonged to the Sociedad del Sagrado Corazón de Jesús at Guadalupe Church received permission from Rev. Méndez to form a similar sociedad at San José mission. At about the same time, their wives formed the Sociedad del Sagrado Corazón de María (later changed to Sociedad de Nuestra Señora de Guadalupe or Guadalupanas). In 1940, these two organizations at San José church enrolled 26 and 24 members respectively. Fifteen young women enrolled in a society called Hijas de María and 20 young men enrolled in their own organization. The four organizations included a large proportion of the 320 parishioners from 65 families who were registered in San José church in 1940. These organizations formed the core group that worked in partnership with the Holy Cross Fathers to bring the Catholic faith to Mexican immigrants living south of the Colorado River in what was then the Diocese of San Antonio.
In 2015, the men and women of these two societies continue to work together to carry on the work begun by their antecedents in 1940. Although there are now many other ministries operating in the San José Church community, these are the only two organizations that have operated continuously since the church was founded 80 years ago.

## Holy Cross Mexican Missions in Austin, 1939-1946

San José Catholic Church in Austin was founded by men and women of the Congregation of the Holy Cross, as were some thirty other Roman Catholic Churches in the Diocese of Austin. The three congregations in the C.S.C. movement consist of separate organizations for priests, Brothers and Sisters. Members of all three C.S.C. congregations helped in the work at San José Church.

### Origins of St. Edward’s University

The history of the C.S.C. in Central Texas dates back to 1868 when Mr. and Mrs. Doyle, members of St. Mary’s Parish in Austin, purchased a 498-acre farm south of the Colorado River and east of what is now Congress Avenue. After Mr. Doyle’s death in 1871, his widow bequeathed 398-acres of the Doyle farm to the Catholic Church for use as a school. She advised Bishop Claude Marie Dubuis, the Bishop of Galveston, of this intended gift. Rev. Edward Sorin, C.S.C., who founded Notre Dame University in Indiana, and Bishop Dubuis visited the Doyle farm in 1872. Father Sorin purchased an adjoining tract of 123-acres on the Austin-San Antonio Highway and gave Mrs. Doyle a note of $995 for her 398 acres. When Mrs. Doyle died in 1873, she willed the note to Sorin.

In 1874, the Holy Cross Fathers accepted Bishop Dubois’ offer of a parish in Austin and Rev. Daniel Spillard became the first C.S.C. pastor of St. Mary’s Church (now Cathedral). At the same time, Sisters of the Holy Cross took charge of St. Mary’s old rock parish school on E. 10th Street and two Holy Cross Brothers and three Holy Cross Sisters took possession of the Doyle farm. By 1878, a school that eventually became St. Edward’s University opened in a building at the Doyle farm. In 1889, the school building moved to its present location on the hilltop on the Robard’s tract adjacent to the highway leading to San Antonio.

### Guadalupe Church was founded in 1907

In 1907, two new Catholic churches were built in Austin: St. Austin’s at the University of Texas and Our Lady of Guadalupe at the northwest corner of W. 5th and Guadalupe Streets. Rev. Patrick O’Reilly C.S.C. founded Guadalupe Church as a national or language parish for Mexican Catholics. During the era of racial segregation, every religious denomination in Austin created separate churches for Anglos, African-Americans and Mexicans. By 1923, Rev. O’Reilly was the pastor of Sacred Heart Chapel near a railroad junction in east Austin where a large number of Mexicans lived in railroad boxcars. This chapel was later moved to the 2300 block of East First Street and became a mission of Guadalupe Church. It is now Cristo Rey Church.

In 1925, because of a shortage of Holy Cross priests who could speak Spanish, the Missionary Oblate Fathers took charge of Guadalupe Church. Nevertheless, the Congregation of the Holy Cross continued to play an outsized role in Austin. Holy Cross Brothers and priests staffed St. Edward’s University and Holy Cross Sisters staffed several Catholic schools including St. Mary’s Academy.

### Holy Cross priests began work in South Austin in 1937

In 1937, a Holy Cross priest laid the cornerstone of Holy Cross Church for African-American Catholics on E. 11th Street. In the late 1930s, the Congregation of the Holy Cross began missionary work south of the Colorado River on the northern border of the San Antonio Dioceses and in 1939 four missionary priests were working with Mexicans along the Colorado River. In 1940 Holy Cross priests, Brothers and Sisters occupied positions in South Austin at the University of St. Edward's, the missions of San José (Spanish-speaking) and Holy Family (for African-American Catholics) and the Parish of St. Ignatius, Martyr (English speaking).

As a result of a census conducted by Sisters of the Missionary Catechists, Holy Cross priests established missions on the Austin-Lockhart Road (now the San Francisco Javier Church), in Buda (now the Santa Cruz Church), in Montopolis (Our Lady of Light, now Our Lady of Sorrows Church) and Vasquez Chapel and the settlement of Garfield (both now extinct). All the missions south of the Colorado River were in the Diocese of San Antonio.

Between 1936 and 1939, Rev. Alfredo Mendez, a native of Puerto Rico, built eleven mission stations in the Diocese of Galveston north of the Colorado River. In July 1939 he was assigned to work among Mexicans living in Travis County south of the Colorado River in the Diocese of San Antonio. A church historian, Brother William Dunn, said that Mendez received the assignment after a stay in the Catholic hospital in San Antonio. Archbishop Arthur J. Drossaerts of San Antonio occupied a nearby bed and, after hearing of the work done in the Galveston Diocese, invited Mendez to do the same in his diocese. Holy Cross priests Donohue and Houser were suggested as collaborators. The Bishop set the geographic limits of the Mission, agreed that the “Mother Church” would be in South Austin and approved appeals to the Catholic Church Extension Society for building funds.

### San José was the Mother Church of the Mexican Missions

The Mother Church was located only blocks from a Catholic church for English-speaking Anglos (St. Ignatius Martyr) that was dedicated in February 1940. Neither Mexicans nor African-Americans were allowed to attend St. Ignatius Church and, in 1942, Rev. Edwin Bauer C.S.C. started a separate mission church (Holy Family) for African-Americans at 618 W. Johanna Street.

Rev. Mendez and his collaborators started the Mexican mission on the assumption that the new parish would be a national or language parish as was Guadalupe Church. However, at that time, a bishop could not create a national parish on his own accord. This created confusion and in 1946 and 1947 the Archbishop appointed Mendez and his helpers as Assistant Pastors of St. Ignatius Martyr Church although they actually worked at the Mexican Mission nearby. Archbishop Robert Lucey asked that the Holy See erect San José as a national parish to remedy this problem. This was done and San José was created as a national parish inside the boundaries of St. Ignatius Martyr Parish on Easter Sunday 1947.

In February 1940, construction of the Mexican Mission’s Mother Church began. During the construction of the church, Mass was said outdoors at the Luís Z. Calderon farm on the Vinson road north of what is now Stassney Lane. For a few months in the spring, Mass was said in the chapel of the convent of St. Ignatius Martyr Church at 307 W. Johanna Street.  Shortly after the Mother Church (San José) was completed in June, the men began work on its mission stations. By the end of 1940, Rev. Mendez was able to report 150 baptisms and 65 registered families at San José in Austin, 20 baptisms and 70 registered families at Guadalupe in Garfield and one baptism and 180 registered families at a mission on the Lockhart highway near Colton. He explained that the mission at Colton (now San Francisco Javier Church) had just been completed as he wrote the report and this accounted for the lack of baptisms there.

### The Mexican Mission built four missionary churches

In addition to the three missions, the Mexican Mission operated five preaching stations at Buda (now Santa Cruz Church), Manchaca, Elroy, Creedmoor and Oak Hill. Rev. Mendez and his helpers from St. Edward’s University were celebrating Mass every Sunday at San José and every other Sunday at the other missions. Children at each mission and preaching station were given catechetical instruction at least once a week. In 1942, Mendez reported four missions with church buildings (San José in Austin; Guadalupe at Garfield; San Francisco at Creedmoor; Santa Cruz in Buda) and ten preaching stations (Bluff Springs, Turnerville, Dry Creek, Manchaca, Colorado (perhaps Montopolis), Norwood, Oak Hill, Elroy, Owens and Maha).

Rev. Mendez had a number of collaborators between 1939 when he began the mission and 1948 when he was reassigned. Mendez was the only full-time priest assigned to the mission but three Holy Cross Sisters from St. Mary’s Academy and half a dozen men from St. Edward’s University helped him as priests and teachers. His earliest helpers included Rev. Peter Mueller C.S.C., Rev. Thomas Culhane C.S.C. and Rev. James Donahue, C.S.C.

All of the missions and preaching stations were within 15 miles of St. Edward’s University and Rev. Mendez had a car. He reported that he spent fifty cents a trip on Sunday and Catechism day. In 1940, he reported that income from the missions was, “Roughly $1.50 to $2.00 a Sunday.” During all of 1940 receipts from the plate collection totaled $308. Mendez explained that his parishioners were extremely poor. The Sisters who surveyed the area for the Mexican Mission reported that most Mexican farm workers lived in shacks on their employer’s property and were “wretchedly” poor. Mexicans living in Austin were laborers or construction workers although a few owned small businesses.

### “The Congregation of the Holy Cross never asked for anything”

Rev. Mendez and the Holy Cross congregations did not expect that the Mexican Missions would ever be a source of income for them. Mendez used donations from the Catholic Church Extension Society and donors “in the north” to build the mission stations. He borrowed money from his sister. In 1946 the Mexican Mission had a total debt of $3,236.25, mostly for construction of mission churches. There is also a loan of $221.25 to the Seminary at 4% interest. Before Mendez was transferred to Notre Dame in 1948, the Bishop complained that Mendez had asked so much from the Extension Society that other parishes were starved for capital funds. In April 1963, Rev. Houser said, “In 23 years of work at San José, the Congregation of Holy Cross has never received or asked for anything. Even that should not go on forever, since we have Seminarians to train and the sick and aged to care for.”

The Congregation of the Holy Cross was the godfather of many of today’s Spanish-speaking Catholic churches in Central Texas. Holy Cross priests continued to administer San José Church until 1993 when Diocesan priests took over the parish. Between 1939 and 1993, thirty-one Holy Cross priests and numerous C.S.C. Sisters and Brothers labored to build San José Church and its missions. They did not expect, nor did they receive, a financial reward for their work. Their reward came from elsewhere.

## Holy Cross in Mexico

Members of the Congregation of the Holy Cross have been involved in missionary work in Central Texas since they first arrived in Texas in 1874. When the congregation took charge of the Austin parish, the parishioners of St. Mary’s were German and Irish Catholics. Austin was not founded until after the Republic of Texas was created and there were few native Spanish-speaking Tejanos living in the area in 1874 (139).

By 1907 the rapidly growing Mexican barrios along West Avenue in what is now downtown Austin attracted the attention of the Holy Cross brothers, sisters and priests who staffed St. Mary’s Church and Academy and St. Edward’s College. Rev. Patrick O’Reilly, C.S.C., began working with the Spanish and Italian-speaking residents of the West Austin colonia. In April 1907 the Bishop of Galveston dedicated a missionary chapel at the corner of Fifth and Guadalupe Street for this community that became la Iglesia de Nuestra Señora de Guadalupe (128).

Prior to 1918 a mission was created near the village of Garfield located along the Bastrop Highway between Austin and Bastrop. Priests and brothers from what was then St. Edward’s College attended to this mission. In 1919, the Travis County School Board granted permission to build a church adjacent to the County Mexican School and the County Mexican Cemetery in School District #35. In 1919 Rev. Walter O’Donnell, CSC, of St. Edward’s built a chapel on property. This mission was called Guadalupe Church (71).

In 1923 the Catholic Home Mission Guild of Austin built a chapel in East Austin that eventually became Cristo Rey Church. At the time five of the sixteen members of the Board of Directors of the Mission Guild were Holy Cross Fathers: Rev. Angus MacDonald (Guadalupe), P.J. O’Reilly (Seton Infirmary), Michael Quinlan (St. Mary’s), Edward Burns (St. Mary’s) and Matthew Schumacher (St. Edward’s) (127). Of these Rev. MacDonald and Rev. O’Reilly spoke Spanish.

In the 1930's four Spanish-speaking Holy Cross priests, Rev. Frederick Schmidt, C.S.C., Rev. Thomas Culhane, C.S.C., Rev. Alfred Mendez, C.S.C., and Rev. Joseph Houser, C.S.C., were assigned to Central Texas. They formed Catholic communities that soon became parishes in which Spanish was the primary language (197).

### Rev. Frederick Schmidt, C.S.C.’s mission to Mexico

By 1937 Rev. Frederick Schmidt, C.S.C., was serving as the pastor of St. Helen’s in Georgetown (71). He worked at St. Helen’s and its missions for the next 35 years. In 1972, when he was 65 years of age, he took a sabbatical from his work in Central Texas and found a position in a small parish near San Luís Potosí. The parish lacked a priest. At the end of the year, he received permission to continue to work in the village of Ahuacatlán. He was pastor there for the next 25 years (197).

During those years, many Holy Cross religious Brothers, Sisters and priests visited Fr. Schmidt at his parish in México and some, like Fred Underwood, C.S.C., and later John Korscmar, C.S.C., took groups of young people to learn about the culture and help Schmidt for some weeks in the summer months (197). In the spring of 1974, a group of young people from San José and Dolores Churches began a mission project to Mexico that lasted until 1985. During June, July and August of 1974, 1975 and 1976, about 30 persons, about half from San José Parish and half from Dolores Parish, traveled to a parish south of Saltillo to work as Catechists. They worked in San Rafael Parish in the State of San Luís Potosí (249:21/04/74) (249:09/06/74) (250:12/09/74) (250:03/11/74) (223:27/07/75) (119).

In 1981, the Mission Group from Austin traveled to Father Schmidt’s mission at Ahuacatlán. The young people and their chaperones left Austin in June or July and stayed at the mission for two weeks (223:05/07/1981) (223:12/07/1981) (223:27/06/82). The Mission Group made the trip to Ahuacatlán annually from 1979 until 1985 under the leadership of Paul Gonzales and Jesse Ortiz (223:05/09/82) (223:16/01/83) (223:23/01/83). The size of the group varied each year from 30 to 15 persons. They collected items such as canned food and powdered milk as gifts for Rev. Schmidt’s mission (223:05/06/83) (223:07/07/1985).

The relationship between Dolores and San Jose Parish and their sister parish in Ahuacatlán did not end in 1985. Until at least 1993 both Austin parishes continued to send money from a Second Collection to Rev. Schmidt’s mission. Father Schmidt passed away in 2003.

### A second Holy Cross Parish in Mexico

In 1985 the Southern Province of the Congregation of the Holy Cross decided to take a second parish in Mexico. In 1986 a delegation traveled to Monterrey and were encouraged to staff Santo Tomás Moro Parish in the town of Guadalupe, east of the city of Monterrey. In 1996, when the parish was divided, Holy Cross Fathers took charge of the poorer of the two parishes, Nuestra Madre Santisima de La Luz.

In 1993, Holy Cross took responsibility for San José Parish in Taman, San Luís Potosí, very near the first Holy Cross Parish in Ahuacatlán (197). This parish primarily serves indigenous Nauhtal-speaking people.
